30+ Writing Tips for Software Engineers
by Ian Lund

Writing from a technical point of view can sometimes be a difficult task. A key thing to remember is that writing is a skill which can be improved with practice. Here are some tips and tricks to keep in the back of your mind next time you are writing a technical document.
George Orwell once said, “When I sit down to write a book, I do not say to myself, ‘I am going to produce a work of art.’ I write it because there is some lie that I want to expose, some fact to which I want to draw attention, and my initial concern is to get a hearing.”
Orwell was a fictional author, but this thought can apply to technical writing as well. Consider your main concern for what you are writing about. You are exposing truth and facts about a particular subject. Your goal is to pass on the knowledge that you have to your reader. Your concern is to well educate your audience.
Keep in mind as you read these points that writing is not a series of words scattered chaotically until they make sense, but rather they are a series of words placed methodically in order that one might portray a story. Whether to educate or to entertain, your work is a story nonetheless. Do not just write to write. Do not waste words. Write with a purpose and choose your words carefully. In the words of Hunter Thompson, “Not a wasted word. This has been a main point to my literary thinking all my life.”

1. Simplify the topic and don’t over explain it.
Simplify rather than over explain the topics you're writing. Give the reader a chance to think through what he or she is reading. Don’t over explain a topic to the point that the reader feels talked down to.

2. Simplify your wording rather than try and explain big words
Even if the reader understands technical jargon, most people do not want to read a text with sentences that don't flow well and long words that are hard to pronounce. A technical document should captivate and draw in a reader just like a story would.

3. Commit to a single topic at a time
Draw in the reader and keep him or her away from outside distractions. Bunny trailing and jumping between topics can be a big distraction to your reader. Jumping from one topic to another relevant topic is okay sometimes, but too much jumping back and forth gets confusing for the reader.

4. Have a specific goal in mind that you want to convey to your readers
Be sure that your reader understands the main point.

5. Know your audience
Know who your target audience is and who will be the most likely to read your document.

6. Keep a clear distinction between the beginning, the middle, and the end
Stick to your outline and be sure that you have smooth transitions between the various parts of your text.


7. Write for non-technical readers
Write so that it is easy for anyone, on any level, to understand.
 
8. Don’t constantly repeat yourself 
Repeating the same thing over and over is not helpful.

9. Imagine explaining the topic out loud
How does your text sound when you read it aloud to another person?

10. Use real world examples
Apply your writing to situations in the real world.

11. Use hypothetical, but relevant examples
Use hypothetical scenarios to expand your readers imagination so they can more creatively problem solve a variety of situations.

12. Build a broad foundation for your readers
Show your reader the big picture and then focus their attention on small details.

13. Make sure that your topic is relevant
Your writing may pertain to one topic or idea, but not to others.

14. Write to yourself
When you are writing, imagine how you would read the text.

15. Write to your reader not an audience
Write to your reader as if you were having a one on one conversation with them, not as if you were giving a presentation.

16. Be consistent
Keep your writing style the same throughout the entire document.

17. Define a personality in your writing style
Find your own voice within your writing to make what you are saying more interesting, rather than dull and monotonous.

Be happy to pass down your knowledge
Enjoy the fact that someone is coming to you for your advice and expertise. This happiness will be evident in your writing.

18. Know the content
Be knowledgeable yourself in the material which you are presenting.

19. Establish a structure to your writing
Stick to your outline and allow the document to flow in a way that reads clearly and precisely.

20. Incorporate useful visuals
This includes pictures, tables, graphs, etc. Consider the visual aesthetic of your text, including the way you organize your words, structure the outline of the document, and the font sizes you choose.

21. Keep a level head
Be passionate about what you are saying, but don’t over use punctuation and excessive capitalization to get your point across.

22. Establish an appropriate voice
Allow your writing style to give you the voice that you need to adapt to particular instances.

23. Avoid time-sensitive claims
This is very important, especially in technical writing. Certain claims about facts may or may not change depending on the circumstances, time period, and current supporting evidence. 

24. Cite your sources
When you make a claim or a quote about something in your text, be sure to cite the source.

25. Revise your draft
Writing is a skill that must be crafted in order to be perfected. You must repeat the same action over and over to master that action. Craft the perfect final product by repeating the draft over and over again.

26. Check your facts
Back up your ideas by personally researching and checking your facts.

27. Explain new ideas clearly before presenting them
Before you dive head first into the most complicated parts of the topics, explain the subject matter so that your reader understands the context.

28. Avoid first-person
Generally, it is a good idea when writing technical documents to steer clear of writing from a first-person point of view.

29. Reduce your use of ambiguous terms
When writing technical information, you must be clear and precise. Don’t let any of your words be open for interpretation.

30. Do not use slang
Technical writing should be presented as polished and professional as possible.

31. Present yourself as a teacher
You are the teacher and you are giving a presentation to your class. This is the approach you should take when writing technical information. Your work will be used for others to learn from your knowledge.

32. Present the material to the reader as if they were your student
If you are the teacher, then the reader is your student. Keep this idea in the back of your mind while you are writing. Write in a way that the reader wants to learn from you.

Being a good writer is not a skill that will be mastered overnight. The craft of writing takes much practice to perfect. I hope that you found some of these tips useful in helping to make you a better writer. When it comes to writing, implement these skills in a way that fits your unique style of communicating. Remember, that even in technical writing, you are capturing a reader and drawing them into a story. Whether the piece of literature is a fictional novel or a technical how-to manual, your words tell a story.
As an engineer, communicating your thoughts in written form can be difficult. Always be willing to learn and grow your writing skills. Search for and save valuables resources for writing. Examples such as Grammerly.com or a good dictionary/thesaurus.
Below are a few links to some resources and guides that can help you improve your writing.

This first link has resources for both general writing as well as technical writing.
https://libguides.sjsu.edu/techwriting

The next website was made specifically for engineers containing other links to tools and resources valuable to the craft of writing.
https://communicationforengineers.com/comprehensive-writing-resources/

These websites can provide you with other links, books, articles, tools, and more that are designed, some of which specifically for engineers, to help you as a technical writer.
In conclusion, I want to remind you that becoming a good writer does not happen overnight. Even professional writers are not generally born with a special gift, rather a passion and a desire to work hard at their craft. Spending time practicing and using the resources given will help you, but ultimately you must have the will to allow your writing skills to improve.
Your voice is through not only what you say, but what you write. Whether you are writing a fictional novel or a technical manual, you are telling an important story that needs the power to capture the attention of the reader. That power comes from good writing and good writing comes from practicing. Put what you've learned to action and write to captivate your reader.
